Add blog for stale controller mitigation (#54792)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2026/2026-03-26-staleness-mitigation-for-controllers/index.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes v1.36: Staleness Mitigation and Observability for Controllers"

> date: 2026-03-26

Reviewer: Per our guidance to blog authors:
```suggestion
date: 2026-03-26
draft: true
```

Kubernetes API server for changes to objects that the controller cares about. When the controller needs to take action, it will
first check its cache to see if it has the latest information. If it does not, it will then update its cache by watching the API
server for changes to objects that the controller cares about. This process is known as "reconciliation".

However, there are some cases where the controller's cache may be outdated. For example, if the controller is restarted, it will
need to rebuild its cache by watching the API server for changes to objects that the controller cares about. During this time, the
controller's cache will be outdated, and it will not be able to take action. Additionally, if the API server is down, the controller's
cache will not be updated, and it will not be able to take action. These are just a few examples of cases where the controller's
cache may be outdated.

## Improvements in 1.36

Kubernetes v1.36 includes improvements in both client-go as well as implementations of highly contended controllers in
kube-controller-manager, using those client-go improvements. 

### client-go improvements

> In client-go, we have added the `AtomicFIFO` feature on top of the existing RealFIFO queue implementation. Doing so allows for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In client-go, the project added _atomic FIFO processing_ (feature gate
name `AtomicFIFO`), which is on top of the existing FIFO queue implementation. The new approach allows for
```

the queue to atomically handle operations that batch events such as the List portion of the ListWatch operation. This ensures
that the queue is always in a consistent state, even when events come out of order. Prior to this, events were added to the queue
in the order that they were received, which could lead to an inconsistent state in the cache that does not accurately reflect
the state of the cluster.

With this change, we can now ensure that the queue is always in a consistent state, even when events come out of order. To take

> advantage of this, we can now introspect into the cache to determine the latest resource version that the controller cache has seen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
advantage of this, client-go can now introspect into the cache to determine the latest resource version that the controller cache has seen.
```
?
(avoid using "we", because "we" could mean SIG API Machinery, Google, the Kubernetes project, "I and also you, the reader", &hellip;)

This is done with the newly added function `LastStoreSyncResourceVersion()` implemented on the `Store` interface [here](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go@v0.36.0/tools/cache#Store). This function is the basis for the staleness mitigation features in
kube-controller-manager.

### kube-controller-manager improvements

> In kube-controller-manager, we have added the ability for 4 different controllers to use this new capability. The controllers are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In kube-controller-manager, the v1.36 release hadded the ability for 4 different controllers to use this new capability. The controllers are:
```

1. DaemonSet controller
2. StatefulSet controller
3. ReplicaSet controller
4. Job controller

These controllers all act on pods, which in most cases are under the highest amount of contention in a cluster. The changes are

> on by default for these controllers, and can be disabled by setting the feature gates `StaleControllerConsistencyControllerName`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on by default for these controllers, and can be disabled by setting the feature gate `StaleControllerConsistency<API type>`
```

to `false` for the specific controller you wish to disable it for. For example, to disable the feature for the DaemonSet controller,
you would set the feature gate `StaleControllerConsistencyDaemonSetController` to `false`.

> When the feature is enabled, the controller will first check the latest resource version of the cache before taking action. If the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the relevant feature gate is enabled, the controller will first check the latest resource version of the cache before taking action. If the
```

latest resource version of the cache is lower than what the controller has written to the API server for the object it is trying to
reconcile, the controller will not take action. This is because the controller's cache is outdated, and it does not have the latest
information about the state of the cluster.

### Use for informer authors

Informer authors using client-go can also immediately take advantage of these improvements. See an example of how to use this feature 

> in the [replicaset informer](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/137212). This PR shows how to use the new feature to check 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the [ReplicaSet informer](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/137212). This PR shows how to use the new feature to check 
```

if the informer's cache is stale before taking action. We provide a `ConsistencyStore` data structure that queries the store
and compares the latest resource version of the cache with the written resource version of the object. 

In replicaset, we track both the replicaset's resource version and the resource version of the pods that the replicaset 
manages. For a specific replicaset, we track the latest written resource version of the pods that the replicaset owns as well as

> any writes to the replicaset object itself. If the latest resource version of the cache is lower than what the controller has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any writes to the ReplicaSet itself. If the latest resource version of the cache is lower than what the controller has
```

to reconciliation to decide whether to reconcile or not. It returns true if the cache is up to date for the object, and false 
otherwise. It will use the information provided by `WroteAt` to determine if the cache is up to date.
3. `Clear`: This function is called by the controller when an object is deleted. It is used to remove the object from the consistency 
store. This is mostly used for cleanup when an object is deleted to prevent the consistency store from growing indefinitely.

The UID is used to distinguish between different objects that have the same name, such as when an object is deleted and then 
recreated. It is not needed for EnsureReady because the consistency store is only concerned with catching up to the latest resource 
version of the object, not the specific object. It is primarily used to ensure that we don't delete the entry for an object when it 
is recreated with a new UID.

With these 3 functions, an informer author can implement staleness mitigation in their controller.

## Observability

In addition to the staleness mitigation features, we have also added observability features to kube-controller-manager. These

> features are enabled by default when the staleness mitigation features are enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
metrics are also enabled by default, and are controlled using the same set of feature gates.
```
